
COMPARABILITY OF DATA


The BRFSS is a cross-sectional surveillance survey currently involving 52 reporting areas.  It is
important to note that any survey will have natural variation over sample sites; therefore some
variation between states is to be expected.  The complex sample design and the multiple
reporting areas complicate the analysis of the BRFSS.  Although CDC works with the states to
minimize deviations, in 1996 there were some deviations in sampling and weighting protocols,
slight differences in question wording,  populations covered on some sections,  sample size,
response rates,  and collection or processing  procedures.  This section identifies these issues for
1996.

A.  1996 Data Anomalies and Deviations from Sampling Frame and Weighting Protocols

Alaska

Alaska's sample design is made up of three random digit-dialed strata and four listed strata,
where phone numbers are selected from a list of putative household numbers.  The sampling
frame contains all of the household numbers in the random digit-dialed strata and an estimated
45% of all household numbers in the listed strata.  This represents an exclusion of approximately
9% of all residential numbers in Alaska.

In 3 out of 4 geographic strata, prefixes are assigned to a high (RDD) or low (listed) density
stratum depending largely on the number of  active  household numbers (about 2000 being the
threshold) in the exchange (10,000 numbers).  All numbers in the fourth geographic stratum are
assigned to the listed density stratum.  In the RDD strata, the probability that a number is
selected depends on the number of active household numbers in its exchange.  In the RDD strata,
a number of prefixes equal to the target sample size are selected at random in proportion to their
number of active HH's.  (A prefix can be selected more than once.)  Once a prefix is selected into
the RDD sample, 48 suffixes are randomly generated.  Once the entire sample for the stratum is
generated duplicate numbers are deleted without replacement.  The final result is h lists of phone
numbers per stratum, each containing 48 or fewer unique numbers, where h is the target number
of completes per stratum.  Phone numbers are called sequentially from each list until one
complete per list is obtained.

California

California's 1996 sample design utilizes a sampling frame consisting of hundred blocks that
contain three or more listed household telephone numbers.  Telephone numbers are sampled in
direct proportion to the number of  listed household numbers in the hundred block from which
each is selected.  The design also varies probabilities of selection by the county to which a prefix
is assigned according to one of various criteria such as total households or population.  The
criteria  may have varied at the different times sample records were selected.   During sample
selection, if a known business number is initially selected, it is replaced by the next eligible
number on the sampling frame,  which increases the probability of selection of numbers preceded
by known business numbers.  Any number selected within the previous five to six months by any
of the clients used by California's vendor is also replaced by the next available number on the
sampling frame unless this would result in an insufficient number of sampling units being
provided.  No adjustment has been made for the differential probabilities associated with
selection being made in proportion to hundred block listings, county, or replacement of business
or recently selected numbers.


Hawaii

The Hawaii Department of Health generates a monthly stratified RDD sample from a list of
working prefixes supplied by GTE Hawaiian Telephone Company.  These prefixes are divided
into six strata.  In Hawaii's data, strata five and six (Molokai and Lanai Islands) are coded as a
single stratum (stratum five).  There is no adjustment for relative probabilities of selection
between the two strata.  The stratum-specific probabilities of selection were determined by
dividing the number of household telephone in each recorded stratum into estimates of the
telephone households in each stratum.  A more appropriate adjustment would have been to divide
the number of telephone numbers generated in each stratum by the size of the sampling frame. 
There may also be differences in the probabilities of selection of telephone numbers and
clustering within strata that are not taken into account in the weighting.

Nevada

Nevada's 1996 sample design utilizes a sampling frame consisting of hundred blocks that contain
five or more listed household telephone numbers.  Telephone numbers are sampled in direct
proportion to the number of  listed household numbers in the hundred block from which each is
selected.  The design also varies probabilities of selection by the county to which a prefix is
assigned according to one of various criteria such as total households or population.  The criteria 
may have varied at the different times sample records were selected.   During sample selection, if
a known business number is initially selected, it is replaced by the next eligible number on the
sampling frame,  which increases the probability of selection of numbers preceded by known
business numbers.  Any number selected within the previous five to six months by any of the
clients used by Nevada's vendor is also replaced by the next available number on the sampling
frame unless this would result in an insufficient number of sampling units being provided.  No
adjustment has been made for the differential probabilities associated with selection being made
in proportion to hundred block listings, county, or replacement of business or recently selected
numbers.

Oregon

In Oregon for 1996, density weights are missing for January through June.  All records for this
time period received a density weight of 1.  For July through December, there were 18 records
with a weight of 4; all other records received a weight of 1.

Texas

In 1996, Texas used a sample design in which only phone numbers from hundred blocks with
one or more listed household numbers were included in the sampling frame.  Such hundred
blocks were estimated to contain 97.1% of all household numbers in Texas.  Numbers from this
frame were selected with an equal probability of selection.

Other areas

In a few states, a portion of  sample records intended for use during one month may have been
completed in another month.  This deviation should only affect analyses based on monthly,
rather than annual, data.

B.  Other 1996 limitations of the data

In addition to departing from the standard for sample designs, California modified the wording of
mammography and Papanicolaou (PAP) smear questions.  These questions may have limited
comparability  to those of other reporting areas.   California also asked the HIV/AIDS
section questions to persons 18-45 years of age rather than to those 18-64 years of age as
specified.

Oklahoma's  sample includes a disproportionate number of persons 65 years or over compared
with their state  population.  An age distribution that differs substantially from the population
distribution in the survey may produce biased estimates of risk factor prevalences, particularly
since many characteristics of individuals are affected by age.  Further information on age
distribution is shown in Table 5 of the Summary Quality Control Report available on the internet
web site: www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/brfss.

Respondent race distribution between the sample and the population differed for some reporting
areas, and may produce biased estimates of risk factor prevalences.  The discrepancy between the
percentage Non-white in the sample and the percentage Non-white in the population is an
indicator of racial bias of the sample.  The percentage Non-white in the sample is affected by
interstate differences in the protocol for coding the race of Hispanics.  For example, Texas
and Idaho coded Hispanics as Other Race unless the respondent identified themselves as
belonging to one of the standard categorical races the first time they were asked the question. 
New Mexico, by contrast, probed for one of the standard race categories.  Finally, California
coded the race of Hispanics as White unless they identified themselves as belonging to one of the
other standard races the first time they were asked the question.  These differences in protocol
affect the percentage Non-white in states with large Hispanic populations and may  introduce
bias in the race-specific risk factor prevalences for these areas. ( See Tables 2-4 in The
Summary Quality Control Repor for additional information.)

Income non-response varies substantially by reporting area.  Although the median non-response
rate on this item is 5.6%, it ranges from 1.2% to 31.1% across states.  Thirty-one percent of
Oklahoma's respondent records were missing income, as were about 20% of the records in South
Carolina and Arizona.  Compared with other items on the survey, income non-response is
relatively high.  For example, item non-response for educational attainment has a median of less
than 1%, and a maximum of 5.6%.

Telephone coverage averages about 95% for U.S. states as a whole, but ranges from 3.2%
non-coverage in North Dakota, to 13.3% in New Mexico.  It is estimated that 24% of households
in Puerto Rico are without telephones. 

Dual questionnaires and/or partial year coverage occurred in Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee, and
New York.  Illinois used dual questionnaires, and collected data on core items involving
exercise, nutrition, weight control, and modules concerning oral health, hypertension,
cholesterol, immunization, injury control, and alcohol for only 6 months of the interviewing
period in 1996.  Kentucky used dual questionnaires and collected data on the following modules
for only part of the year: diabetes, smokeless tobacco, health care utilization, oral health,
hypertension, cholesterol, immunization, colorectal screen, injury control, alcohol, and firearms. 
Tennessee collected data for the modules on sexual behavior, oral health, preventive counseling,
colorectal screening, and firearms for only part of the year.  New York used dual questionnaires
and collected data on the following modules for part of the year: sexual behavior, oral health,
preventive counseling, colorectal screen and firearms.  Data users will need to alter 
program code so that the usual "missing/dk/refused" codes are not combined with "9's" appearing
in records due to noncoverage in the states mentioned here.   

q:\cd96\compare